the single most powerful predictor of a
healthy microbiome of a biodiverse
microbiome
was the diversity of plants in your diet
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i am here with somebody
that is going to challenge so much of
what i've been thinking and i'm excited
for you guys to hear this stuff it's
really powerful dr will balsawitz thank
you for joining me today
tom it's a it's a pleasure to be on the
show with you my man and i have to tell
you that for the listeners who are at
home right now
you said my last name without asking me
how to say it and you said it perfectly
and so i have to give you props right
off the bat because well thank you in my
entire life and i'm 40 years old i don't
think i've ever heard someone say it
with such confidence that's fine so i
have to give it to you there well thank
you good sir it's uh i had to rehearse
that like a zillion times i have said
your name now so many times i didn't
want to didn't want to mess it up so
glad i nailed it and now i want to dive
into so about six or seven years ago now
um my wife had just a catastrophic event
and people that are familiar with the
show will have heard this story so i'll
keep it quick but uh went from thinking
everything was fine and she has a
threshold event and then now all of a
sudden for
a year our lives were completely put on
hold from a microbiome issue but at the
time i had probably before that happened
only maybe six months before that
learned that there was a thing called
the microbiome and
the punch line of course is that i had
to start researching about the
microbiome and that was why i ended up
doing this show because i was reading so
much about the microbiome but where we
ended up was like vegetables are coming
for you they are you have to be so
careful with vegetables but meat
meat you can eat with impunity and that
was like our first sort of safe place
and it's only been in the last couple of
years that i've started to go oh god
like all or nothing stuff just makes me
nervous so let me really try to push the
boundaries and see what the vegan
vegetarian community have to offer so
i'll say that i've gone from
really
comfortable with a true
all-meat carnivore diet
and
less interested in vegetables to now
probably about 60 of my calories come
from animal products and 40 from
vegetable and i'm perfectly happy to
take it all the way to 100 but there's
going to be a few things today that i
need to better understand
so
with that let us begin with one simple
question
how
do you rebuild a microbiome
and to answer that if you can just tell
us first like what is a microbiome for
people that aren't super familiar
oh my gosh tom i have so much that you
have loaded you have loaded me up here
with stuff that i want to talk about so
you know we think of ourselves and we
were raised you and i are probably
pretty similar in age we were raised
thinking of ourselves as these powerful
autonomous creatures we're the humans
we're the masters of our domain
and what we have failed to realize and
understand until very recently
is that we're not alone
covering us from the top of our head to
the tip of our toes are an innumerable
number of invisible microbes
and these microbes when i say microbes
what i'm talking about i'm talking about
bacteria
talk about yeasts i'm talking about
these things called archaea that have
been on this planet for four
billion
years
talking about potentially parasites um
and there's a role for viruses too by
the way
so now they cover all external
structures
and the number is
kind of absurd so you know for example
if you hold up your thumb and you take a
look at it
right there on your thumb there are as
many microbes as there are people in the
uk
that's crazy to imagine
because they're invisible but they're
there and they're most concentrated
inside of our colon which is our large
intestine we have 39 trillion microbes
that's the equivalent of taking a
hundred
galaxies full of stars
compacting it down and putting it inside
your intestine and there they are 39
trillion microbes outnumbering your
human cells you have more microbes
living in and on you
than you have human cells
so now this microbiome tom
they're not just
there
they're not just freeloaders
like leeching off of us
they are there with a purpose
they have been there since literally day
one of humanity so if we want to talk
about evolution
forget human evolution we need to start
talking about co-evolution
co-evolution which is humans
and their microbes
rising and falling together and that's
what we've done over three million years
and actually the dna tom if you think
about it
we cracked the genetic code
20 years ago
and when we did this bill clinton was
the president and he actually called a
press conference and like tony blair was
there and all these famous people were
there because they thought that they
were going to cure cancer and reverse
heart disease by cracking the human
genetic code
it hasn't worked out we still have
cancer we still have heart disease why
because 99.5 of our genetic code
is not ours
99.5 of our genetic code comes from
these microbes that live inside of us
not to mention that our genetic code
that we have these microbes have the
ability to flip switches
and actually affect which genes get
turned on or get turned off we call this
epigenetics people have heard of this
epigenetics your microbiome plays a
critical role in epigenetics and tom you
know this evolutionary pattern that took
place
it's more than just them regulating our
genetics they're affecting our digestion
our access to nutrients
our immune system 70 of our immune
system lives inside of our gut that's
like the most concentrated source of the
immune system
they're affecting our metabolism they're
affecting our hormone balance
our brain health our mood our cognition
the way we think it's like
you take a step back and you just
realize
everything that matters in human health
these microbes are playing a part in it
because it's talking about ecosystems
and ecosystems can be massive right like
our planet we can think of as one giant
ecosystem
they could be very large things that we
all sort of recognize as the classic
ecosystem like the amazon rainforest or
the great barrier reef
but then like literally living inside of
every single one of us
this gut microbiome this this is an
ecosystem
and the same rules that apply to the
amazon rainforest or to the great
barrier reef apply to this ecosystem
that lives inside of us
where it's about
balance
it's about harmony
it's about
biodiversity
and when you have biodiversity what that
means is yeah there's good guys and yeah
there's bad guys but guess what they all
live together in one balanced harmony
and they're all bringing something that
they contribute
to the ecosystem and when you start
knocking them off and eliminating them
you contract that biodiversity and what
you find regardless of what ecosystem
you're talking about whether it's your
gut whether it's the amazon rainforest
or whether it is planet earth
when you lose biodiversity
you you are creating instability within
the ecosystem and that unfortunately is
what we're facing in the 21st century
when it comes to the gut microbiome for
a lot of people right now
yeah so you know just in going back to
my initial thing that i want to make
sure that we don't wrap this episode
until people know how to rebuild because
so many people right now they've just
battered it through the things you're
talking about now antibiotics over
sterilization
um
terrible diets
so
what what are the things that we start
doing that will meaningfully
allow us to get that biodiversity and
biodiversity is probably where we should
start
assuming someone has
hurt their biodiversity how do we begin
to build it back
well i think to answer this question
properly for you
i have to separate out what i want to
say if i were taking care of your wife
lisa six years ago
versus what i want to say to your
audience right now who isn't necessarily
in such a dire situation as she was six
years ago
so um you know with regard to the
average person who's listening to this
show
think about how much life has changed in
the last 100 years
like literally a hundred years ago
people who still had like
you know horses and carriages and
boogies and you know they were going to
their local market everything was
locally sourced there were no processed
foods
and you know we didn't have all these
chemicals that we apply to our skin or
to our hair on a daily basis
and we didn't you know we spent a lot
more time outdoors we weren't watching
television watching netflix 100 years
ago
and so we what we need to do is we need
to get back to a more authentic style of
life and that doesn't mean rolling
around in the dirt i i kind of find that
idea to be like a little bit silly it's
more that we need to get back to
we need to exercise
we need to actually sleep
we need to get away from blue light late
in the evening
we need to get away from the foods that
are just like completely filled with
these chemicals that literally these
microbes were not exposed to 100 years
ago and now this is making up the
majority of calories for most americans
talking about the processed foods
so you think about what are the things
in our modern lifestyle that are having
a negative consequence
and then you flip your attention to
how do we rebuild it and i do want to
talk about that in a lot more detail
than what i'm about to say
but i think one of the major issues and
what i wrote my book about
is that we live in a society that is
completely devoid of fiber consumption
and fiber is the preferred food of these
gut microbes
this is what they thrive off of they
grow stronger because of it and if we're
looking at biodiversity
in the largest study to date to allow us
to correlate dietary choices and
lifestyle choices
to the biodiversity within our gut
microbiome
they found they answered this question
the single most powerful predictor of a
healthy microbiome of a biodiverse
microbiome
was the diversity of plants in your diet
and that's because every single plant
has its own unique way fiber is not just
fiber like we've been
talking about fiber since i was a kid as
if it's like it's just metamucil you
stir the orange drink so grandma can poo
and it's
that's not the way it works
every plant has its own unique types of
fiber
those unique types of fiber feed unique
families and microbes these microbes are
picky eaters
not every micro wants kale
and so when we make different dietary
choices in terms of the broad broadening
out the biodiversity within our diet
this leads to more different species of
microbes being fed and it leads to more
biodiversity within our gut microbiome
and we have a couple of studies to back
that up at this point tom
but you know transitioning for a moment
over to your wife lisa and six years ago
let me just say that
if i am taking care of a person like i
personally
i think you know this about me i don't
know if your audience knows this about
me until right now
i personally am vegan
but i didn't i'm not
teaching the science because i'm vegan
i'm vegan because the science led me to
where i am today
and i teach plant-based plant-based
meaning fruits vegetables whole grains
seeds nuts and legumes
and you said tom that you're 40
plant-based and that's about 35 percent
more plant-based than i was 10 years ago
so to me
i want to take each individual person
and i want to move them in the right
direction
if i were taking care of your wife lisa
six years ago
i wouldn't say to her hey you need to go
vegan
that wouldn't be the conversation
what i would do is i would first try to
get her to gain some weight because
she's in a calorie deficit and that's
why she's losing weight
and i
look there are going to be some people
that don't like that i'm going to say
this
but in that setting i totally get
consuming animal products
because it is it is high calorie
and in that setting in a person who's in
a calorie deficit
they need that
and we need to get them back to balance
because she is in a catabolic state but
when we get her back to balance my goal
is to start to reintroduce these foods
by foods i'm meaning to plants
my goal is to start to introduce these
gently
low and slow
to rehabilitate her gut to build it up
and make it stronger
because what i want we'll get super hard
on that in a second before we move off
the meat thing i want to figure out
why is it if in and we may not have the
literature so maybe this is just a sort
of gut instinct but
why is it that for a lot of people and i
don't know if it's a majority of people
but there's certainly a contingent of
people for whom
it's the um whether it's fodmap foods or
it's fermented whatever there's like
vegetables can trigger something but i
don't often hear of somebody that's
having that's had a
significant disruption to their
microbiome i don't hear oftentimes that
they're struggling with
um
meat so what i'm trying to figure out is
why is the safe thing just to remove
vegetables why are vegetables
problematic when you have dysfunction
sure if the reason why is because
we there are an innumerable
number of types of fiber that exist in
nature
and there's extreme complexity to this
fiber
and so as a result we actually evolved
to allow our gut microbes
to handle the digestion of fiber for us
so they have specific digestive enzymes
that they use
and you know tom we we actually as
humans
we don't have the innate enzymes
to digest fiber
if if we were sterile if we didn't have
a gut microbiome fiber would literally
go in the mouth and it would come out
the other end
but we're not sterile we have a gut
microbiome and they have these enzymes
that they use to basically break down
the fiber into its components
and then release it into basically short
chain fatty acids which we can talk
about in more detail what those are but
we rely on our gut microbiome to break
down fiber and
people who suffer with food intolerances
it is because they are struggling to
break down the complex carbohydrates in
their diet
and it's because they lack the enzymes
that they need in that moment
to process the fiber
now if they reduced their fiber intake
they would be able to tolerate it
and in that process they would actually
start to build up the gut microbiome in
a way where over time like a muscle
that muscle grows stronger as you train
it
so when you start introducing fiber if
you go low and slow you start to ramp it
up slowly over the course of time
that's how you go from having a weak
muscle to over the course of time
eventually building up the strength of
that muscle so that it is more capable
of processing the fiber
and the end result the reward for doing
that
is that the dietary restrictions
go away
and your gut becomes stronger and you
restore function to the gut
and so there's a great reason for us to
want to do this because when we restrict
our diet
we feel better in the short term
but we pay the price in the long term
because our gut actually grows weaker as
a result of those choices
and i would make a quick analogy i hope
you don't mind to a person who hurts
their knee
right so if you hurt your knee
we all know what we're going to do
we're going to rehab
you work your way through rehab and you
know that there's going to be some pain
during the process of rehab
but you slowly push yourself a little
bit more every single time you go
until you build that knee back up and
then you're back to playing basketball
again
we have another choice
the other choice is to stop walking
and if you stop walking you will never
feel pain in that knee for the rest of
your life
but the problem is your muscles grow
weaker
you start gaining weight you get
diabetes you get high blood pressure you
get heart disease
we know where that's going right so we
all make the choice to go through rehab
to rebuild the knee and that's why i'm
saying when it comes to the gut
rather than contracting our diet which
makes us feel better short term but
hurts us in the long run we need to
instead have a strategy not to hurt
ourselves but to slowly reintroduce
these foods to build it back up so that
we can restore function and get back to
eating without any restriction
so
do we do we need the like so we need the
microbiome to digest fiber do we need
the microbiome to digest fats and
protein
or is that why that is easier to handle
when we have uh dysbiosis
we don't need the microbiome to
process fats and protein our pancreas
has most of the enzymes that we need to
be able to do that
so the pancreas is cranking out enzymes
like lipases and proteases lipases for
fats proteases for proteins
our gallbladder and our liver is
producing bile which helps us to absorb
the fat
but
but make no mistake that all dietary
choices
no matter what they are
every single food that you put into your
mouth
will change your microbiome
and there's a number of different ways
that that takes place sometimes it's the
choice that you make that is enriching
certain species because that's their
preferred food
sometimes it's the fact that the other
species are not being fed and so they
grow weaker
and so
with every single dietary choice we are
contributing to the balance that exists
within our microbiome
okay so now
so that's really helpful and i can't
believe that i didn't know that so thank
you for that information on the meat um
that makes sense so okay you've got
dysbiosis you've uh
antibiotics washing your hands too much
maybe you had an eating disorder at one
point you've you know
even i will say that unintentionally i
had an eating disorder because i was
trying to get really lean so i was just
basically eating chicken breast and
broccoli for like two years it was
amazing i got shredded i hated my life
and i was inflamed everywhere you can
possibly imagine it sucked
but i got shredded it was wonderful uh
so that was unintentional right it
wasn't like i was ever out of control or
you know binge and purge or anything but
i would say that sort of overly
restricted would have a very negative
impact on my digestion okay so you've
made
poor choices didn't do it on purpose i'm
not judging you hopefully you're not
judging yourself all the grace in the
world but here we are we have a
microbiome that's got issues so i fully
understand
the hey you've got some people the i'm
in analogy here but you've got some of
your bacteria
um all the things that are supposed to
be there they're in a weakened state
because you haven't been feeding them
the things that they need right your
vegetable intake is way too limited or
non-existent
so the ones that are still there
i get it you can make them more robust
by feeding them the things you need to
feed them
but i have a base assumption that maybe
this is incorrect that some of them have
have been eradicated and so they're not
there anymore and so now my question is
can i just eat an apple which has its
own microbiome can i just eat kale
without washing it like how do i get
true how do i reintroduce diversity
yeah so this these are these are great
questions and to be honest with you some
of the answers we're still trying to
figure out
so
in terms of like adding microbes back
there was actually a recent paper that
came out where they called into question
whether or not we should have a daily
recommended microbial intake
because our food is hyper sterilized
you think about preservatives that exist
in our processed foods the way that they
preserve our food
is by retarding the microbes by keeping
the microbes out because it's the
microbes that break down and process it
so
um so what are the foods that can
introduce microbes back
well uh obviously fermented foods
but
living foods like raw foods
contain a microbiome all plants all life
on this planet has a microbiome they
looked at an apple
and the apple has a hundred million
microbes and over a thousand species
that exist as a part of the apple in
fact only on the skin or is some of it
inside the
meat of the apple
actually the most concentrated place was
the core
which is the part that we throw out yeah
so i mean you would think it's on the
skin but actually the most concentrated
place was on the core so so the point
being that when we eat these natural
foods that if you think about 100 years
ago this is what people were eating
when we eat these foods we are having a
microbial exchange that takes place
between the food which is our
environment
and the microbiome inside of us and that
may be of benefit to us as humans all
right so
if we were gonna have a daily
recommended microbial intake what would
that
look like or is it
your kombucha is it uh a probiotic
tablet um
how do we
intelligently
go about taking in our daily microbial
intake
you know i actually
to be completely honest with you tom i
would actually pivot in a different
direction
because we're talking about microbial
daily microbial intake
which makes us focus and think that we
need probiotics to fix our gut issues
and that's simply not true
we have probiotic bacteria
the same bacteria that you will find in
a capsule
already living inside of us
and we just simply need to feed them
and if we feed them they will multiply
and you will have a lot more of them
than you would ever find in a probiotic
capsule
and they're actually inherently yours
which means that they'll stick around
one of the problems with probiotics is
they don't stick they just run through
us
so from my perspective do i think that
we benefit from consuming raw foods from
consuming fermented foods on some level
i do
is that the backbone is that the
direction that we need to go with things
no
the problem that we have really tom is
that
the average american is eating 17 grams
of fiber per day our ancestors ate 100
grams or more of fiber per day
and the recommended amount is 25 grams
for women 38 for men
95 percent of americans are not hitting
the mark
and because of our fiber deficiency
our fiber deficiency is causing us to
suffer consequences because our gut
microbes are not being fed that's the
issue
okay so
um
my hypothesis just to like put these
together so
my very ignorant very layman's like n of
one wife just struggling through that
thing but really know nothing
my hypothesis is she just killed off
some of the species
and we've had her tested multiple times
and who knows if the tests were accurate
but they always come back that she has
very little diversity
um
and even though she's been really good
about reintroducing food she just keeps
hitting limits given how much clinical
experience you have you colonoscopy
people all day every day you work with
people in and out
for you what you've seen over and over
and over is
low and slow you reintroduce these you
start radically increasing the variety
and the microbes are there they've just
been so underfed for so long you're
putting the gut through rehab and they
will come back
so
generally speaking yes i do believe that
to be true
but let's let's not narrow this down to
like what i do for a living where
complex people your your wife lisa comes
into my office six years ago
is she gonna walk out after the first
visit saying dr b says i need to
reintroduce fiber low and slow
and go home
absolutely not like that would be
ridiculous
there's so much more complexity to it
and these are people who are suffering
with complex digestive issues and
sometimes i'm trying to attack other
things not just doing dietary
intervention
and sometimes
i'm putting the dietary intervention on
hold
while i work on other parts of what's
happening with their gut tom their
digestive function is more than their
microbiome
there are aspects that are really
important like motility
or sensitivity of the nerves
our gut is completely carpeted with
nerves we actually have five times more
nerves in our gut than we have in our
spinal cord
they're constantly feeling and sensing
like literally right now as we speak
and we know for a fact that people that
have had a damaged gut
develop something called visceral
hypersensitivity
which means that when they eat food
food that other people wouldn't even
react to other people would be like
whatever no big deal
that person suffers they feel pain and
it's because the nerves are not
functioning the way that we need them to
and so for me you know from a dietary
perspective is my strategy typically to
introduce plants low and slow try to
bring them back in try to restore
diversity to their diet absolutely yes
it is but that's that is a strategy that
gets invoked at certain points on that
path not necessarily right from the
beginning
okay so obviously fiber you've been very
clear about that not for everybody it's
got to be timed well but i think people
understand that one
what are some other ones you've
mentioned
sleep you've mentioned exercise like
what what's health what else is in the
basics
well let's start with the basics the
step number one for every single patient
is always the same what are we treating
so we need to know what we're treating
if we want to be effective at treating
it otherwise we're just throwing mud up
against the wall and seeing what sticks
so to me it's stepping it's working into
that diagnostic
tool bag to try to identify what it is
that exactly is the root of their
problem do you do the female testing or
something else
in some cases in some cases i would
argue that the three most powerful tools
that i have
are upper endoscopy colonoscopy and a
cat scan
between those three things i can
diagnose probably 90 to 95 of the
patients who come to my office because
what i'm doing is i'm taking your
history you tell me your story tell me
tell me what's going on and i'm going to
integrate that with what i'm seeing in
these pictures and try to put the puzzle
pieces together
and so for me that's part of the
powerful information is with my own eyes
you know whether it's endoscopy
colonoscopy or a cat scan i'm using my
own eyes and trying to understand based
upon the story that you're telling me in
the clues that i'm hearing you know what
what's the scoop here what could be
potentially causing this
let me give a couple quick things that
can be common causes of food sensitivity
for people that are very reversible and
they need to hear this
number one
constipation if you have gas and
bloating the number one cause of gas and
bloating in my clinic is constipation
you could poop every day
and still be constipated
you could have diarrhea is that possible
if you don't empty
if you don't completely empty yep so
so
constipation is the manifestation of
symptoms
when you are in completely evacuating
or inadequately evacuating
so if you poop but it's just the little
nugget
and you strain to get it out there's a
lot of people like this i see them every
day in my clinic
and they strain and they poop they're
like doc i poop every day i'm like yeah
but you really do you really feel like
it all comes out
they go no it just doesn't feel like it
sometimes i have to poop again like 30
minutes later
that person's constipated and they're
backing up you know you if you poop out
70 but you trap 30 percent
that 30 is going to start compounding
every single day until you have a
serious constipation issue
and tom you could you could literally
have diarrhea
and there's this thing called overflow
diarrhea
where the cause of diarrhea is actually
constipation
the solid stuff backs up
the liquid sneaks through the cracks and
the crevices and explodes at your bottom
as a liquid stool and you go to your
doctor you're saying i'm having diarrhea
and they say take ammonium and you make
the problem worse
so constipation uh
with those patients get the bowels
moving that's step one in fact i will
not start dietary treatment on a person
who's constipated until i get their
bowels moving how do you get their
bowels moving without changing the diet
many times magnesium magnesium can be a
great first choice
so completely natural
most americans actually are low on
magnesium it's not found very easily in
our diet
and
a magnesium supplement can do
wonders also good good for headaches
good for depression
good for sleep
so a number of other benefits to
magnesium
celiac disease celiac disease is
incredibly common and the blood test for
celiac disease is often wrong there's
two ways that you can know whether or
not you have celiac disease one is to do
an endoscopy and take biopsies
and the second is to do the genetic test
but celiac disease i have diagnosed i
diagnosed celiac disease three times in
one day wow
yeah so it's way more common than people
realize
and the third thing is gallbladder the
gallbladder is incredibly common and it
can cause pain after meals and it's not
always the classic oh pain in the right
upper quadrant radiating to your back
it could be nausea it could be pain
one of the key questions for the
gallbladder for me is do you wake up in
the middle of the night with pain
because the gallbladder doesn't sleep so
if you wake up in the middle of the
night that's not irritable bowel
syndrome
that can be your gallbladder
so so anyway you know to me diagnosis
comes first we need to know what we're
treating
and um and then you know i mentioned
some of the tips that are tricks that i
use one of the other things that i often
do in my clinic tom
is
so
i talk about fiber i'm a believer in
dietary fiber meaning real food
but i find dietary supplements
fiber supplements to actually be very
helpful
for people at the beginning of their
journey not the guy that's doing 600
different vegetables i assume
i take them myself
really why
i take myself because uh
so i guess i am going to be admitting
this very publicly but like i noticed
the difference in my bowel movements
interesting so and i either really would
you be eating more vegetables like i'm
really surprised that given what i
assume
your diet is wildly diverse obviously
100 plant so how is it that you need
more fiber
it's it's not so much that i need grams
of fiber it's that what i'm doing is i'm
supplementing the prebiotic and the
prebiotic is the food that feeds the
microbes inside our gut and i'm
targeting them i'm targeting them with
basically what they need the precursor
to create short chain fatty acids
the kale for example is this mix of
soluble insoluble fiber and it's
embedded in the plant and
you know that's all really good i love
that but when i want to target
specifically the microbiome to create
butyrate acetate and proprionate
the prebiotic fiber supplement
when chosen the right one it allows me
to do that
and i see amazing benefits to my
patients who
need more fiber but tom i also see
amazing benefits in my patients who are
suffering with digestive issues and are
plant-based or vegan
and doing this sometimes gives their gut
the support that they need to get over
the top and really improve their diet
very interesting
okay so
i'm definitely understanding your
strategy in terms of what the toolkit is
how you're making the assessment of
where somebody's at what they need to
change
now getting into some of the dietary
things that you talked about in your
book or i've heard you talk about in
other interviews that i found surprising
um
talk to me about
fat specifically saturated fat like i
thought for sure you'd at least go to
bat for coconut but you actually threw
shade at coconut i think i've i've heard
anybody throw shaded coconut um what is
it about saturated fat that's
problematic
well when it comes to the microbiome
specifically and and you know let me say
there's a lot that we're continuing to
learn
but
i of what i've seen to date when it
comes to saturated fat i have concerns
about the effect that it has on our gut
microbiome
and so
i'll give you an example you know tom
what we look for in research what i'm
looking for
is not just one study that says
something
i'm looking for layers of evidence
coming from different perspectives that
are all pointing me in the same
direction
and when it comes to saturated fat in
the gut microbiome we have pre-clinical
studies
and also animal model studies that
suggest that it induces dysbiosis
and the mechanism that they're pointing
to is that it leads to increased release
of bile
bile to help us to process the saturated
fat
and the bile actually changes the
dynamic within the microbiome
to promote the growth of more what are
called biophilic bacteria
so an example of one of these is
biblophila what's worthia
biophilobotsworthia in these studies
where they look at saturated fat it
starts emerging starts popping out
and biophilisworthy has been associated
with increased risk of inflammatory
bowel disease
there was a study that was done this was
a study actually that changed the way
that i ate in 2014.
it was published in the journal nature
and people can google this the first
author his name was lawrence david first
name lawrence last name david so look up
david nature 2014 you'll find this paper
and basically what they did tom these
guys weren't involved in diet wars
these are scientists they're trying to
understand how the microbiome works in
humans
and what they did was they set up a
group of humans with two polar opposite
diets
five days of completely plant-based
versus five days of completely animal
based so eggs dairy and meat
of course the animal-based diet the
fiber content was zero because there is
no fiber in animal products
and what they saw was that number one
the microbiome changes in less than 24
hours whatever dietary choice you make
so literally the food that you're eating
today will have an effect on your
microbiome tomorrow
can you tell people because you give a
really crazy stat in the book about how
fast the microbiome actually
um has generations
i was super shocked by that
yeah so the microbiome turns over a new
generation every 20 minutes that's crazy
so if you think about it you know three
generations of humans like going back to
your great grandparents
your microbiome is doing that in an hour
in 24 hours if you were to equate you
know if you were to equate the
microbiome uh and how it's evolving so
quickly like this
to human evolution 24 hours for the
microbiome would be the equivalent to
going back to the pyramids for humans
that's so insane
so and and this is why these dietary
choices that we make can change things
so quickly because they're folding over
new generations boom boom boom every 20
minutes there's a new one coming
so the waves are coming fast um
so in this study lawrence david nature
five days of plants versus five days of
animal products and what they saw was on
the plant-based diet they enriched the
bacteria that produce short chain fatty
acids
and no surprise you eat more fiber you
eat more plants you get more short chain
fatty acids they saw that
but on the flip side what they verified
for the first time in humans which was
concerning
was what they were also seeing in the
pre-clinical studies
when you consume this animal product
based diet you increase the biophilic
bacteria
like this bilophyllum wadsworthia that's
been associated with inflammatory bowel
disease in just five days
there was an increase in the bilophyllus
wadsworthia
an increase in this one called
allestipes putra dennis which has been
associated with colorectal cancer
and an increase in bacterioids that's
been also associated with both
inflammatory bowel disease and
colorectal cancer
in five days now that doesn't mean that
in five days people developed
inflammatory bowel
it just means that in five days of this
diet that is devoid of fiber
you are shifting towards something that
may predispose someone who has a genetic
predisposition that may put that person
over the edge
and now they manifest inflammatory bowel
disease so
you know the point from my perspective
is that when we see it in the
pre-clinical studies in the animal model
studies and then it carries into human
studies and we're seeing the same
effect boom boom boom
that's what has me concerned and so you
know the century of fat is a much bigger
topic
it's not just the microbiome but if
we're going to focus on the microbiome
today that's my concern when it comes to
saturated fat
okay so i want to start putting like
really fine points on things so that
people can walk away knowing what the
ideal lifestyle looks like from your
perspective
so
microbiome is involved in just
immeasurable number of things in your
life that you probably don't think about
that you've talked about the
communication back and forth i talked
about the fact that your immune system
70 i think you said
is in the gut which is
utterly fascinating um
we need as wide a variety of plant
substances as humanly possible
you've talked about sleep
i think you mentioned exercise i don't
know that we went too deep into it
walk me through so so we've got those
pieces now what are some other key
pieces that people should be aware of
other than plant-based
sleep
fiber
what are the what are the keys
get a pet
interesting
yeah why yeah
because they have a microbiome too and
we will share microbiome we will share
microbes
with uh the people that we surround
ourselves with so
get a pet love on your spouse or
significant other the people that are
that you share and cohabitate with
you start to share microbes and you
start to become more similar in terms of
your microbiome to one another
so but you know uh perhaps the most
important thing tom
they're people that i see in my clinic
because i take care of a lot of people
who have failed with other doctors
they do everything right they eat you
know they eat a diet that anyone would
recommend they sleep they exercise they
meditate they do yoga
they're still sick if you are suffering
from
trauma
and abuse history
whether it was physical sexual emotional
psychological
if you don't directly address that issue
you will not heal your microbiome
the stress that is driven by that
underlying trauma history
is an open wound that persists and it
festers until it is addressed and so in
my clinic
when a person feels comfortable enough
with me that they trust me that to share
that kind of information with me
typically it takes four or five visits
when they do that
i always know
this is where we need to go next
and we focus on working on that
specifically and we get them the support
that they need to heal
that's interesting the psychology of it
all is definitely not something that
i would have expected you know being in
this now as long as i have what do you
see as the future of the microbiome is
is it going to be fmt's is it just
fixing the diet
um
what is it
okay uh so
let's talk about fmt's if you don't mind
for three minutes please because i think
i think that uh people will be very
interested in this topic
so fmt fecal microbiota transplant
um basically what that means is that you
are taking someone else's poop
and transferring that into you
and it sounds real
how do you get it in
so typically what we do is we'll do a
colonoscopy
and during the colonoscopy the patient
who's receiving the fmt is completely
asleep
not aware of what's going on it's a
routine colonoscopy but during the exam
you basically will release the fecal
transplant through a syringe
because it's a liquid it's not like a
solid poop you're not putting solid poop
into a person
it's a liquid you spray the liquid into
their colon
and it sets in and it takes hold
and
the history here is that
this has turned into the go-to treatment
for one specific infection called
questridioides difficile c diff
c diff is a nasty bug causes diarrhea
like bloody diarrhea
and i've had patients who
lost their colon because of c diff
and people died people have died of this
infection in fact 10 years ago there
were about 30 000 people per year dying
of c diff infection
because we didn't have a good treatment
10 years ago
until we did the most radical absurd
thing
and started using fecal transplant
and when we started doing pico
transplant
almost every single time
within 24 to 48 hours that patient is
cured wow
and basically what you're doing
is you're restoring a balance to the
microbiome so tom it gets back to an
earlier point that we made
which is i said
we need to get away from trying to
destroy everything
and get back to empowering
when you do a fecal transplant you're
not destroying
you're restoring you're giving a
microbiome back and then that microbiome
just naturally suppresses this nasty c
diff infection and so now it works great
for infections
we are studying it for a number of
different conditions there's literally
hundreds of studies i'm going right now
looking at what this is going to do
do i believe that it's going to cure
crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis
no
because i thought you were going to say
yes
tell me what oh i'm sorry i don't want
to die that's so sad
yeah i know so well i think the the
problem is this
if you do a fecal transplant like for
example if i get a fecal transplant
but i don't change my diet
then within three or four weeks i'll be
back to the old microbiome that i had
before because my microbiome will start
evolving to my normal diet right but if
you did
eat
the quote-unquote right way that we've
been talking about this episode
would
somebody with crohn's they get the the
reset they get the fmt and then they eat
the right diet let's just pretend that
they actually stick to it
um would that work or is there something
else going on in crohn's that just makes
it too hard
maybe
it might work it might work that's if we
were to do this study that's the way
that we would have to do it
makes sense okay so
when i was researching you i started
making a list of all the vegetables that
i want to keep in my house now because
you inspired me because you you often
ask people like hey how many vegetables
would you say you eat in a week and the
honest answer for me is probably i eat a
lot like 40 of my calories but i eat
them from six things
so
what's the number that people should be
eating and what are some of the because
look your whole thesis is diversity
diversity diversity but now give me
likes give me some of the main players
won't be all of them obviously um but
you know what are like that dozen ish
that people should really make sure they
have in the fridge okay so
in this study that i referenced before
which was the american gut project where
they found the single greatest predictor
was the diversity of plants
the magic number in that study was 30
different plants per week
now that doesn't mean that 30 is
magically better than 29 and 35 would be
better than 30 but we want to strive to
be up in that arena somewhere in the
range of 30 per week which sounds like a
lot but if you you know if you start
doing things like making smoothie bowls
you could have like 12 on monday morning
in your smoothie bowl and you're already
halfway there almost
so um with regard to what specific
plants i actually had an acronym that i
put into the book
it's called f goals
f goals like f for fiber
so f stands for fruit and fermented
g stands for greens
and whole grains
o stands for omega-3 supersedes so i'm
talking about chia flax and hemp if you
ever make a smoothie put all three of
them in
a stands for aromatics meaning like the
flavor foods like garlic onions shallots
l stands for legumes legumes great
source of fiber resistant starches
prebiotics
and then s
i had a couple things with us that i
wanted to do
so i
really made s about sulfurophane
which is the phytochemical that is an
absolute cancer crusher
that you will find in broccoli sprouts
broccoli sprouts have this very
concentrated source of sulforaphane that
really really helps to prevent cancer
johns hopkins has an actual center where
this is what they study is sulforaphane
and the effects on human health
but beyond sulforaphane with us i also
believe in mushrooms so shrooms
and seaweed or sea vegetables i you know
i think that those are opportunities
where
like sea vegetables for example
most of us don't eat them at all
they have unique sources of fiber they
have unique nutrients and there's
potentially a lot of benefit there
okay so now you've given us some
specifics there
i'll tell you what made my list and you
tell me where i'm going right and where
i'm going wrong so
blueberries blackberries
carrots i do baby carrots specifically i
don't know if that matters
uh broccoli
kale
bok choy collard greens
uh cucumbers
apples
those are sort of my there's a few more
oh celery there's a few more that i have
on the list but
am i missing any sort of obvious like
powerhouses or is you know baby carrots
are they gonna kill me like what how am
i doing
okay so i first of all i love all those
foods i was you know as we were reading
them i got particularly excited about
the collards i live in charleston south
carolina so i have to
and i like the bok choy i thought that
was a good one
um you know what what would be missing i
mean i realized that you know given the
popular narrative and nutrition
these might be considered controversial
by some but i don't really consider them
to be controversial
i think whole grains and legumes to me
those are foundational foods for the gut
microbiome
when i hear legumes i think peanuts what
else is a legume
so peas lentils beans those are all
qualified as legumes and for the person
who has a sensitive gut a great place to
start can be sprouted lentils
lentils are a little bit more gentle and
when you sprout them they become even
more gentle than that and it literally
takes two maybe three days to sprout
them so it's easy
but you know whole grains and and
legumes tom
when we've studied them people who
consume these foods
uh they live longer with less heart
disease and with less cancer
i think that the evidence is very
powerful in that direction
it would be so interesting to see more
and more studies come out that show
causation
versus correlation because i know a lot
of these stories a lot of the studies
are correlative
man so interesting dude i never thought
that somebody could make a book about
fiber as interesting as you made your
book this was great dude um thank you so
much for coming on where can people
connect with you and follow because one
thing i love about you is if you learn
something new and you think hey
i've updated my thinking you don't get
dogmatic about it which i think is
really really powerful how can people
connect
uh so if you want to find me you can
find me on social media on instagram and
facebook as the gut health md
i have a website the plantbedgut.com
with a newsletter where like a new study
comes out
you want to hear the breakdown what does
dr b have to say about this new study
boom it'll be in your inbox that's
completely free
my book fiber fuels um
very proud of it it came out may of last
year it was a new york times usa today
publishers weekly bestseller
here we are and it sold over 120 000
copies wow congratulations man that's
extraordinary thank you
so and um
and finally i have an online course i
felt like
the book was a great starting point
to connect and initiate some thoughts
but really
what i want is to take people deeper and
help them to fully understand
how to heal their unique self no matter
who you are this is not about
this is not about making every single
person the same
this is about meeting you where you are
and trying to get you pointed in the
right direction so that you can be
better
and so that's what my course is my
course is a seven week course that has
video audio case studies journal clubs
live sessions with me live q and a's
private facebook group recipes i mean
just tons of stuff very very immersive
complete experience
so and you can find that at my website
theplantfedgut.com
nice i love it dude thank you so much
for joining me this was a lot of fun
it's so interesting and guys speaking of
things that are so interesting if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential